docs/discord.md, before:

# Discord Configuration

Set the bot token in the ``DISCORD_TOKEN`` environment variable before
starting ``discord_bot.py``:

```bash
export DISCORD_TOKEN="your_bot_token"
python discord_bot.py
```

The Discord bot reads command permission rules from `config/discord.yaml` on startup.
Each top-level key in the file is the name of a slash command (use the full
`group subcommand` name for grouped commands).  Every command maps to two lists:

- `channels` – channel IDs where the command is allowed.  If omitted or empty,
  the command may be used in any channel.
- `roles` – role IDs permitted to invoke the command.  If omitted or empty,
  any member may use the command regardless of role.

Example configuration:

```yaml
npc:
  channels: [1234567890]
  roles: [111111]

lore:
  channels: [1234567890]
  roles: []

"scene as":
  channels: [222222]
  roles: [333333]
```

In the example above `npc` can only run in channel `1234567890` by members with
role `111111`.  The `lore` command is restricted to the same channel but has no
role requirement.  Grouped commands such as `scene as` use their qualified
command name as the key.

Commit message:

Add persistent Discord token configuration

docs/discord.md, after:

# Discord Configuration

Set the bot token in the ``DISCORD_TOKEN`` environment variable before
starting ``discord_bot.py`` or persist it to ``config/discord_token.txt`` using
``config.discord_token.set_token``. When the environment variable is not set
the bot falls back to the stored token.

```bash
export DISCORD_TOKEN="your_bot_token"
python discord_bot.py
```

```python
from config.discord_token import set_token
set_token("your_bot_token")
```

The Discord bot reads command permission rules from `config/discord.yaml` on startup.
Each top-level key in the file is the name of a slash command (use the full
`group subcommand` name for grouped commands).  Every command maps to two lists:

- `channels` – channel IDs where the command is allowed.  If omitted or empty,
  the command may be used in any channel.
- `roles` – role IDs permitted to invoke the command.  If omitted or empty,
  any member may use the command regardless of role.

Example configuration:

```yaml
npc:
  channels: [1234567890]
  roles: [111111]

lore:
  channels: [1234567890]
  roles: []

"scene as":
  channels: [222222]
  roles: [333333]
```

In the example above `npc` can only run in channel `1234567890` by members with
role `111111`.  The `lore` command is restricted to the same channel but has no
role requirement.  Grouped commands such as `scene as` use their qualified
command name as the key.
